compare the set of tools and other apis available to llm orchestrators claude code (up to and including mcp and skills), cursor, and chatgpt web interface. 
specifically tools available to the llm as function calls or whatever. the llm calls the apis somehow. not all tools having anything to do with llms. 

Here’s a “tool-calling surface area” comparison of Claude Code (incl. Skills + MCP), Cursor, and the ChatGPT web interface — focusing only on tools the model can invoke as function calls / structured tool invocations (not “features that merely help the human”).

The shared mental model (so the comparison is apples-to-apples)

All three ultimately implement the same pattern:

The host app gives the LLM a catalog of callable tools (names + JSON-ish schemas).

The LLM emits a structured “tool call” choosing a tool + arguments.

The host executes the tool and returns results back into the LLM context.

MCP standardizes step (1–3) across apps: an MCP server “exposes tools” (each with a unique name + schema/metadata), and a client/host lets the model invoke them. 
Model Context Protocol
+1

Claude Code (Anthropic) — built-in coding tools + extensibility via Skills, plugins, and MCP
Built-in callable tools (what the model can “do” locally)

Claude Code’s own agent has a local, code-centric toolbelt (file read/list/edit, etc.). Anthropic explicitly notes you can even run Claude Code itself as an MCP server that “provides access to Claude’s tools like View, Edit, LS, etc.” 
Claude Code

So the baseline “function-call surface” is basically:

Read/inspect files (View)

List directories (LS)

Edit/patch files (Edit)

(And other IDE-ish primitives typically grouped with those)

Extending the toolset

Claude Code’s big differentiator is the stacked extension story:

MCP servers: connect Claude Code to “hundreds of external tools and data sources” (APIs, databases, SaaS, internal services). 
Claude Code

Transports: local stdio, remote HTTP, (and SSE noted as deprecated). 
Claude Code

Config surface: .mcp.json, CLI management (claude mcp add/list/get/remove), scopes (user/project/local), etc. 
Claude Code

Skills / plugins / hooks: “skills” are reusable procedural modules; plugins can bundle MCP servers; hooks let you wire behaviors into lifecycle moments. (These are “tool-adjacent” but matter because they effectively expand or package tool access.) 
Claude Code
+1

Net: Claude Code’s tool-calling surface is (local coding primitives) + (anything you wire in via MCP), with a lot of packaging/governance mechanics around it.

Cursor — IDE agent tools (search/edit/terminal) + MCP

Cursor Agent is also explicitly built around a tool system: “search, edit, terminal, and MCP capabilities,” plus guardrails and auto-run/auto-apply controls. 
Cursor

Built-in callable tools (typical “agent” primitives)

From Cursor’s docs and Agent descriptions, the LLM can generally invoke tools that:

Search the codebase (indexed project-wide context) 
Cursor
+1

Edit files (multi-file refactors) 
Cursor
+1

Run terminal commands (build/test/install/scripts) 
Cursor
+1

Extending the toolset

Cursor also supports MCP in its agent tool system (same “add servers → model calls tools” pattern), per their “tools” documentation. 
Cursor

Net: Cursor’s tool-calling surface is very similar in shape to Claude Code for day-to-day coding (search/edit/terminal), with MCP as the primary bridge to “outside” systems.

ChatGPT web interface — built-in “workspaces” + Apps (Connectors) + MCP for custom tools

ChatGPT (web) exposes several first-party tool classes the model can invoke inside a conversation, plus an “Apps” layer (formerly connectors) that can include read and write actions — and can be built using MCP.

Built-in callable tools (first-party)

Advanced Data Analysis / Data analysis: a sandboxed Python execution environment for analysis, charts/tables, file transforms, etc. 
OpenAI Help Center
+1

Image generation: “Create image” tool in-chat. 
OpenAI Help Center
+1

Web browsing (Atlas browsing mode): a browsing agent that can search and navigate pages. 
OpenAI Help Center

“Apps” (formerly connectors) as tool calls

OpenAI’s help center describes Apps as a unified layer that can:

Search and reference connected third-party sources

Run deep research with citations

Sync (index content ahead of time)

Perform write actions (create/update data in a connected service) — with a key constraint: actions “request confirmation from you before proceeding with external actions.” 
OpenAI Help Center

Extending ChatGPT with your own tools

OpenAI explicitly says you can “build your own custom app” and “build apps using the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to let ChatGPT call approved tools and retrieve information from services.” 
OpenAI Help Center

Net: ChatGPT web’s tool-calling surface is broader than “coding” out of the box (analysis + images + browsing + app actions), and it also uses MCP as the “bring your own tools” standard.

Quick comparison matrix (tool-calling surfaces)
Platform	Built-in “local” tool primitives the LLM can call	Built-in “external” capabilities	Main extension mechanism for new tools	Guardrails / confirmation defaults
Claude Code	File ops (View/Edit/LS etc.) 
Claude Code
	Depends on connected MCP servers 
Claude Code
	MCP servers (+ plugins/skills packaging) 
Claude Code
+1
	“Use third party MCP servers at your own risk” warning; enterprise allow/deny options exist 
Claude Code

Cursor	Search / edit / terminal tools 
Cursor
+1
	Depends on MCP servers 
Cursor
	MCP 
Cursor
	Explicit “guardrails / auto-run / auto-apply” controls 
Cursor

ChatGPT web	Data analysis (Python sandbox), image gen, browsing 
OpenAI Help Center
+2
OpenAI Help Center
+2
	Apps: search, deep research, sync, write actions 
OpenAI Help Center
	Apps built with MCP 
OpenAI Help Center
	Write actions require user confirmation 
OpenAI Help Center
The biggest practical differences (in orchestrator terms)

“Local environment control”

Claude Code + Cursor are IDE/CLI-native: file/tree/patch + terminal are first-class, always-there tools.

ChatGPT web is workspace-native: python sandbox + browsing + apps, but not “your repo on disk” unless you bring it via an app/connector or upload.

“Tool ecosystem standardization”

All three now converge on MCP as the common substrate for adding tools. Claude Code and ChatGPT explicitly describe MCP as the way to connect to “tools, databases, and APIs,” and MCP spec defines tools as named, schema-described calls. 
Claude Code
+2
OpenAI Help Center
+2

“Write-action safety model”

ChatGPT’s Apps layer is explicit that external write actions must ask for confirmation. 
OpenAI Help Center

Claude Code and Cursor both have guardrails, but their docs emphasize configuration patterns and warnings; the exact confirmation UX varies by host, server, and policy. 
Claude Code
+1

Recent context on MCP becoming cross-vendor infrastructure
theverge.com
AI companies want a new internet - and they think they've found the key
19 days ago
itpro.com
Anthropic says MCP will stay 'open, neutral, and community-driven' after donating project to Linux Foundation
19 days ago
please describe the apis of the tools relating to function calling, mcp, skills, etc. what can the llm ask them to do, what is the model? what do they inject into the llm prompts? describe the orchestrators. 

Below is a systems-level description of the APIs and models behind tool calling, MCP, skills, etc. — not product marketing, but what the LLM actually sees and can do, how orchestrators work, and how prompts are constructed.

I’ll organize this from lowest level → higher-level orchestration, then map it onto Claude Code, Cursor, and ChatGPT.

1. The common abstraction: “LLM with callable tools”

All three systems converge on the same abstract machine:

LLM = (token predictor) + (tool schema catalog) + (runtime loop)

At runtime, the LLM does exactly one of two things:

Emits normal text tokens, or

Emits a structured tool invocation that conforms to a declared schema

Everything else is orchestration.

2. Tool APIs: what a “tool” actually is
2.1 Canonical tool definition (language-agnostic)

A tool is defined by:

{
  "name": "edit_file",
  "description": "Apply a patch to a file",
  "input_schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "path": { "type": "string" },
      "diff": { "type": "string" }
    },
    "required": ["path", "diff"]
  }
}


Key properties:

Field	Purpose
name	Token-level selector the model must emit
description	Injected verbatim into the prompt
input_schema	JSON Schema (or close variant)
(optional) output_schema	Rarely enforced; usually free-form

Important:
The LLM never executes the tool.
It only predicts a JSON object that matches the schema.

2.2 What the LLM can “ask” tools to do

Only what is expressible in schemas:

Pure functions: search(query) → results

Stateful actions: edit_file(path, diff)

Side-effecting calls: run_command(cmd)

Queries over external systems: DBs, APIs, SaaS

The LLM:

cannot loop

cannot branch

cannot retry

cannot see stack traces

cannot inspect the host

All of that is orchestrator behavior.

3. MCP (Model Context Protocol): the standardization layer
3.1 What MCP actually standardizes

MCP defines how tools are discovered and described, not how models think.

At minimum, an MCP server exposes:

interface MCPServer {
  listTools(): ToolDefinition[]
  callTool(name: string, args: JSON): ToolResult
}


Transport-agnostic:

stdio (local)

HTTP / JSON-RPC (remote)

(SSE historically)

Key MCP concepts
Concept	Meaning
Tool	Callable function w/ schema
Resource	Read-only contextual data
Prompt	Optional reusable prompt fragment
Server	Process exposing tools/resources
3.2 What MCP injects into the LLM prompt

When an orchestrator connects to MCP servers, it injects:

Tool catalog

Tool descriptions

Schemas

Capability boundaries

Example (conceptual):

SYSTEM:
You have access to the following tools:

Tool: search_repo
Description: Search the repository using ripgrep
Input schema:
{
  "query": string,
  "path": string?
}

Tool: edit_file
Description: Apply a unified diff to a file
Input schema:
...


This is not magic — it’s just tokens.

3.3 MCP does NOT define

When tools are called

Whether confirmation is needed

Retry logic

Parallelism

Safety policies

UI affordances

Those belong to orchestrators.

4. Skills, plugins, apps — what these really are

Different names, same structure:

A packaged bundle of tools + prompts + policy

Typical contents
Component	Purpose
Tools	JSON-schema functions
Prompts	System or developer prompt fragments
Policies	Allowed/denied operations
Metadata	Scoping, permissions, auth
“Skill” vs “MCP server”
Term	Reality
Skill	A curated or branded MCP server
Plugin	Same, with UX metadata
App	Same, with UI + auth
Connector	Same, read/write gated

They all end up as tool schemas injected into the prompt.

5. Orchestrators: the real intelligence

The orchestrator is the control loop around the LLM.

5.1 The canonical agent loop
repeat:
  prompt = system + dev + user + tool_results
  model_output = LLM(prompt)

  if model_output is tool_call:
     validate(schema)
     maybe_confirm()
     result = execute_tool()
     append(tool_result)
  else:
     return model_output


The LLM is stateless.
The orchestrator is stateful.

5.2 What orchestrators decide (not the model)
Decision	Made by
Which tools exist	Orchestrator
When tool calls are allowed	Orchestrator
Confirmation UX	Orchestrator
Retry / backoff	Orchestrator
Parallel calls	Orchestrator
Guardrails	Orchestrator
Sandboxing	Orchestrator
6. Mapping this onto each platform
6.1 Claude Code
Tool model

Core tools:

view_file

edit_file

list_dir

etc.

Plus MCP-imported tools

Prompt injection

Claude Code injects:

Tool schemas

Repo context summaries

Safety notes (“third-party tools may be unsafe”)

File diffs after edits

Orchestrator characteristics

Strong local-state authority

Multi-step reasoning encouraged

Tight loop between edits → diffs → re-prompt

MCP servers can be local binaries

Claude Code is basically:

a programmable REPL around an LLM

6.2 Cursor
Tool model

search

edit

run_terminal

MCP tools

Prompt injection

Indexed codebase summaries

File relevance rankings

Tool schemas

Diff previews

Orchestrator characteristics

IDE-first

Aggressive automation (auto-apply, auto-run)

User-configurable guardrails

Emphasis on batch edits

Cursor optimizes for:

refactoring velocity with human veto power

6.3 ChatGPT Web
Tool model

python (sandbox)

browse

image_generate

App / connector tools (via MCP)

Prompt injection

Tool schemas

Safety policies

Citation requirements

App-specific instructions

Confirmation rules

Orchestrator characteristics

Conversation-centric

Write-actions require confirmation

Stateless between sessions unless pinned

Strong policy mediation

ChatGPT is:

a general agent shell with a conservative write barrier

7. The “model” the LLM sees (important!)

From the LLM’s point of view:

Tools are just tokens

Schemas are just text

It does pattern completion, not planning

The illusion of agency comes from:

Re-prompting

Tool result injection

State accumulation

There is no special reasoning module for tools.

8. Key architectural insight (the big picture)

All three systems are converging on:

LLM = pure function
Orchestrator = operating system

MCP is the POSIX layer:

Portable

Declarative

Boring (in a good way)

The real differentiation is in:

Orchestration policy

UI/UX

Safety posture

State management

If you want, next we can:

Compare tool calling vs ReAct vs function calling vs JSON mode

Design a minimal MCP server from scratch

Analyze failure modes (tool hallucination, schema drift)

Compare OpenAI vs Anthropic tool semantics

Talk about parallel tool execution and speculative decoding

Just say where you want to go next.

open source generic or extensible orchestrator ecosystems? tools like commercial offerings have including file browsing and editing, terminal, python runtime, javascript isolate runtime, etc. I want to make a sveltekit app that renders markup llm output with interactive embedded apps, data browsers, video viewers, etc. Need my own orchestrator and tools to tie it all together. 

You’ve got two overlapping needs:

an open-source orchestrator ecosystem that already does “agent + tools” (file ops, terminal, python, etc.), and

a SvelteKit “generative UI” front end that can render LLM markup into interactive embedded apps (data browsers, video viewers, etc.) — with your own tool runtime behind it.

Below is a practical menu of ecosystems + a concrete architecture that fits what you described.

Open-source orchestrator ecosystems worth building on
A. “Framework-first” orchestrators (you embed them as a library)

LangGraph (LangChain) — stateful agent/workflow runtime (graph/state machine). Great if you want explicit control over steps, persistence, and multi-agent coordination. 
LangChain Docs
+1

What you get: a way to model your orchestrator as a graph of nodes (LLM calls, tool calls, routers), which is exactly what you want once you add UI, tool retries, approvals, background jobs, etc.

Microsoft AutoGen — multi-agent conversation orchestration patterns and runtime. 
GitHub
+1

Good if you want “teams of agents” patterns out of the box (planner/worker/reviewer) and a conversation-centric flow.

Microsoft Agent Framework — newer unified open-source direction combining enterprise-ish foundations (Semantic Kernel) with AutoGen orchestration ideas. 
Microsoft for Developers
+1

Worth a look if you want “production posture” plus multi-agent orchestration in the Microsoft ecosystem.

Haystack Agents — a clean Pythonic “tools + agents” approach, with decorators for defining tools and toolsets. 
Haystack
+1

Great if your back end is Python and you want a straightforward tool abstraction that maps well to function calling.

LlamaIndex Agents / Workflows — strong at “agents that use retrieval + other tools”, plus multi-agent extensions (llama-agents). 
LlamaIndex Python Documentation
+2
LlamaIndex
+2

Good if your “tools” heavily include data access/RAG and you want that to be first-class.

B. “UI/workstation-first” open-source ecosystems (you can fork or use as reference)

These are closer to “ChatGPT-but-open” and often already have plugins/tools:

LibreChat — open-source ChatGPT-style UI with an Agents system; documentation explicitly notes tool-using capabilities and MCP integration. 
GitHub
+2
LibreChat
+2

If you want “agent UX patterns” (approvals, tool logs, artifacts), LibreChat is a great reference implementation.

Open WebUI — has a Tools/Functions plugin system; docs explicitly discuss “Native function calling” mode and tool execution event streaming patterns. 
Open WebUI
+2
Open WebUI
+2

Excellent if you want a working open tool/plugin mechanism and “status events” to drive a live UI.

AnythingLLM — full-stack “private ChatGPT” app with agents/RAG and an extension story; useful as a product/UX reference even if you don’t adopt its internals. 
GitHub
+2
AnythingLLM
+2

C. MCP as the “USB-C for tools” layer (best for your “extensible tool ecosystem” goal)

If your goal is “I want a tool bus so I can add tools later,” MCP is the right center of gravity:

MCP standardizes tool discovery + invocation (tools/resources/prompts), and multiple SDKs exist for building servers/clients. 
Model Context Protocol
+2
Microsoft Learn
+2

Practical implication for you: build your orchestrator so that tools are mostly MCP servers. Then your “file browser / terminal / python / js isolate / video indexing / data browser” all become swappable tool services.

What “tools like commercial offerings” usually include — and how to reproduce them safely

Here’s the typical “coding-agent toolbelt” and how open-source systems implement it:

1) File browsing/editing tools

list_dir(path) → entries

read_file(path, range?) → text

apply_patch(path, unified_diff) → success + new_hash

(optionally) search_repo(query, glob?) → matches

This is exactly the style Claude Code exposes (“View/Edit/LS” etc. are mentioned as a tool set in Claude’s MCP server integration docs).

Key safety: strict workspace roots, path allowlists, max file sizes, diff-only writes.

2) Terminal / shell tool

run(cmd, cwd, env?, timeout_ms) → stdout/stderr/exit_code

Key safety: sandbox (container / VM), resource limits, deny dangerous syscalls, timeouts, output truncation.

3) Python runtime tool

python_exec(code, files?, timeout_ms) → stdout/stderr/artifacts

Key safety: locked environment, no network unless explicit, file quotas, timeouts.

4) JavaScript isolate runtime tool

js_exec(code, input_json?, timeout_ms) → output_json/logs

Key safety: real isolate (not “eval”), CPU/memory limits, no ambient FS unless a tool provides it.

5) Media/data viewers (for your SvelteKit generative UI)

These are UI tools, not necessarily “LLM tools” — but you’ll want LLM-callable helpers like:

extract_video_chapters(video_url|id) → segments

transcode_preview(video_id, t_start, t_end) → mp4_url

query_table(dataset_id, sql|filter) → rows + schema

open_artifact(artifact_id) → metadata

A concrete architecture for your SvelteKit “interactive markup” app

This is the pattern that scales without turning into spaghetti.

Layer 1 — Orchestrator (your “agent OS”)

Implement a stateful loop that manages:

conversation state

tool catalog

approvals (“human in the loop”)

retries/backoff

tool logs

artifact store

streaming events to UI

Best fit starting point:

If you like explicit control: LangGraph as the orchestrator core. 
LangChain Docs
+1

If you like multi-agent dialogue: AutoGen patterns. 
GitHub
+1

Layer 2 — Tool bus (MCP-first)

Make your tool runtime:

an MCP client inside the orchestrator

talking to multiple MCP servers:

mcp-fs (file ops)

mcp-terminal (sandboxed command exec)

mcp-python (sandboxed python)

mcp-js-isolate (sandboxed JS)

mcp-media (video indexing/transcode)

mcp-data (datasets/sql)

MCP SDKs exist explicitly to build both clients and servers, with transports for local/remote. 
Model Context Protocol
+1

Layer 3 — “Generative UI” protocol (LLM output → interactive components)

Don’t rely on raw Markdown alone. Use a constrained, parseable envelope so the UI can render safely.

Two good options:

Option A: “Markdown + directives”
Example:

Here’s the dataset:

:::app type="table" dataset="sales_q4" view="pivot":::

Now watch this segment:

:::app type="video" asset="demo.mp4" t="00:03:20-00:04:10":::


Your UI:

parses Markdown

extracts :::app … ::: blocks

renders Svelte components from an allowlist

Option B: JSON AST (“render plan”)
The model returns:

{
  "blocks": [
    {"type":"markdown","text":"Here’s the dataset:"},
    {"type":"app","app":"table","props":{"dataset":"sales_q4","view":"pivot"}}
  ]
}


This is more robust for toolchains, replay, and auditing.

Layer 4 — Event streaming to the browser

Use SSE or WebSocket to stream:

model tokens

tool call started/ended

tool progress/status events (Open WebUI’s docs emphasize status events as a reliable pattern). 
Open WebUI
+1

artifact created notifications

This is what makes the UI feel like “Cursor/Claude Code” instead of “submit → wait → response.”

A pragmatic “build plan” that gets you to a working system quickly
Step 1: Pick your orchestrator core

LangGraph (Python) if you want a clean graph runtime.

Or build your own small loop in Node/TS first, then migrate.

Step 2: Start with 4 foundational MCP tools

FS: ls/read/apply_patch/search

Terminal: run (sandboxed)

Python: exec (sandboxed)

JS isolate: exec (sandboxed)

You’ll immediately have “Claude Code / Cursor class” capabilities, but in your own app.

Step 3: Add an “artifact store” and IDs

Every tool output that matters becomes an artifact:

artifact_id

mime_type

metadata

preview_url (optional)

permissions

Your UI blocks then refer to artifacts by ID.

Step 4: Define your UI embed components

Start with:

TableViewer

VideoViewer

FileDiffViewer

LogViewer

ChartViewer

Then teach the LLM the allowed components via a render spec injected into the system prompt.

Step 5: Lock down security early

sanitize Markdown (no raw HTML unless allowlisted)

render interactive apps only from an allowlist

sandbox iframes for untrusted content

tool permission gating + approvals for side effects

(ChatGPT-style systems often require confirmation for write actions; you’ll want a similar barrier for destructive tools.)

If you want “open source Cursor/Claude Code-like tool UX” to copy/learn from

LibreChat Agents system (tool-using agents, MCP mention). 
DeepWiki
+1

Open WebUI Tools/Functions system + tool execution events. 
Open WebUI
+2
Open WebUI
+2

These are excellent reference implementations for:

tool logs

progress events

permissions

multi-provider model routing

What I’d do in your shoes (minimal regrets path)

Make MCP your tool substrate from day 1 (so tools are “plugins” by construction). 
Model Context Protocol
+1

Build a small orchestrator (even if you later swap it for LangGraph/AutoGen).

Treat “generative UI” as a render plan protocol (Markdown directives or JSON AST), not freeform HTML.

Stream events to SvelteKit so tool calls feel alive.

If you tell me your preferred backend language (Node/TS vs Python) and where you want the sandboxes to run (same machine, Docker, k8s, remote workers), I can sketch a concrete module layout (folders, interfaces, message types) and a first set of MCP tool schemas that match your “interactive embedded apps” vision.

From the LLM’s point of view:

Tools are just tokens

Schemas are just text

It does pattern completion, not planning

The illusion of agency comes from:

Re-prompting

Tool result injection

State accumulation

There is no special reasoning module for tools.

----

Wow! 
so how does the planning just happen, is emergent, or what? in the state? 

This is the right “wait, hold on” reaction. You’ve just hit the core illusion — and also the real answer.

Short version up front:

Planning does not “exist” inside the LLM.
Planning is an emergent property of a closed-loop system made of:

a next-token predictor

a persistent external state

repeated re-prompting

selection pressure from the orchestrator

There is no ghost in the machine — but there is a feedback system.

Let’s unpack this carefully.

1. There is literally no planner in the model

Inside the model, at inference time:

No goal stack

No agenda

No call graph

No loop

No memory except the prompt

No notion of “step 1 / step 2” beyond tokens

When it “plans,” what it’s really doing is:

Predicting text that looks like planning, because that pattern correlates with success in training.

That’s it.

2. Where “planning” actually lives

Planning is distributed across four places, none of which is the LLM alone.

A. The prompt (static bias)

The system/developer prompt injects:

“You are an agent”

“Solve tasks step by step”

“Use tools when needed”

“Think before acting”

This creates token-level pressure to emit structures that resemble plans.

Not because the model reasons — but because those structures historically lead to correct answers.

B. External state (the real memory)

The orchestrator holds:

conversation history

tool results

diffs

artifacts

approvals

retries

partial failures

Every turn, the model is re-prompted with:

Here is what you did.
Here is what happened.
Here is what still exists.
What comes next?


That external state is the plan — but the model never “sees it as a plan.”
It just sees text.

C. Re-prompting (temporal glue)

This is the critical mechanism.

Each loop:

Model emits “next step” (text or tool call)

Orchestrator executes

Result is injected back

Model sees a new prompt with more context

This creates the illusion of:

persistence

intention

causality

But each step is stateless inference.

D. Selection pressure (the hidden hand)

Here’s the part people miss.

The orchestrator:

rejects invalid tool calls

retries on failure

enforces schemas

blocks unsafe actions

asks for confirmations

truncates nonsense

So the system filters trajectories.

The only “plans” that survive are ones that:

fit the schemas

lead to progress

don’t error out

match user intent

Over many steps, this looks like deliberate planning — but it’s really survivorship bias.

3. Planning is not stored anywhere — it’s enacted

There is no internal representation of a plan.

Instead, planning is enacted through:

emitting a “plan-shaped” explanation

acting on the first step

observing consequences

emitting the next “plan-shaped” continuation

This is why plans are:

revised mid-stream

abandoned silently

contradictory

occasionally brilliant

occasionally nonsensical

There is nothing to “update” except the text in the next prompt.

4. Why this works anyway (and surprisingly well)

Because training taught the model that:

“Text that looks like plans tends to precede successful outcomes.”

Examples in training:

math solutions

coding walkthroughs

tutorials

lab notebooks

REPL transcripts

debugging logs

human reasoning traces

The model learned:

planning as a linguistic genre

not planning as a data structure

5. So is planning emergent?

Yes — but specifically:

Planning is an emergent behavior of a closed-loop token predictor interacting with a persistent environment.

Not emergent inside the weights alone.

Think of it like this:

The LLM is a policy.

The orchestrator + tools are the environment.

The loop is a dynamical system.

Planning emerges from interaction, not representation.

6. Where “state” actually lives
Thing people think is “in the model”	Where it actually is
Memory	Prompt + external storage
Plan	Text emitted so far
Goals	System prompt + user request
Control flow	Orchestrator loop
Agency	UI + feedback timing
Intent	Human interpretation

There is no privileged internal slot for any of these.

7. Why “chain-of-thought” helps (but isn’t magic)

When you ask the model to “think step by step,” you are:

forcing it to externalize intermediate states as text

making those states visible to the next inference

giving the orchestrator more structure to feed back

You are not unlocking a new reasoning module.

You are adding more scratchpad tokens.

8. The killer insight for system builders (this is the payoff)

Because planning is not internal, you can:

inject partial plans

rewrite plans mid-flight

summarize history

replace reasoning traces

swap agents

checkpoint and rewind

parallelize branches

prune dead ends

This is why orchestrators matter more than models once models cross a competence threshold.

9. A useful mental model (borrowed from control theory)

The LLM is a stateless controller.
The orchestrator is the plant + observer.
Planning is the trajectory of the closed-loop system.

No trajectory exists until it is executed.

10. Why this matters for your SvelteKit + orchestrator project

This means:

You do not need a “planning module.”

You do not need symbolic planners.

You do need:

explicit state

visible artifacts

resumable steps

tool logs

UI feedback

guardrails

If you get those right, “planning” will appear.

If you get them wrong, no model upgrade will save you.

One-line takeaway

Planning is not something the LLM has.
It is something the system does, moment by moment.

If you want, next we can:

map this onto classical AI planning vs reactive control

compare to subsumption architectures

show how LangGraph makes this explicit

design a “plan-as-artifact” pattern

or show how bad orchestrators break the illusion instantly

Just point.

The llm output can container any number of tool calls. But also arbitrary text outside the calls. What is that used for? Anything you want? Internal dialog that gets dropped on the floor, or logged as a private thought stream, or is it output to the user? or are user outputs themselves tool calls. do you loop the private thought stream back, accumulate it, support editing and condensing it? the llm can usually see the history text output to the user, and that supports condensing, but at what granularity and control of the llm? 

Great question — this is exactly where the abstractions people casually use (“the model thinks, then acts”) break down, and where orchestrator design choices actually matter.

I’ll answer this by separating what the LLM can emit, what orchestrators do with it, and what patterns actually work in practice.

1. What the LLM can emit in one turn

From the LLM’s point of view, a single response may contain:

Zero or more tool calls

Arbitrary free-form text

Structured output (JSON / AST / directives)

Any mixture of the above

There is no semantic distinction inside the model between:

“thinking”

“explaining”

“talking to the user”

“talking to itself”

Those distinctions are imposed entirely by the orchestrator.

2. The three canonical roles of non-tool text

In real systems, arbitrary text outside tool calls ends up serving three distinct roles — whether designers admit it or not.

Role A — User-visible output (default)

This is the simplest case:

The text is shown directly to the user

It becomes part of the conversation history

It is re-injected into future prompts

This is how ChatGPT-style systems work by default.

Implication:
The model can see its own prior user-facing output, which enables:

self-correction

summarization

reframing

condensation

This is the only memory the model actually has.

Role B — Control / coordination text (semi-visible)

This is text that is not intended as final prose, but is still useful:

Examples:

“I will now search the repository…”

“Next, I’ll modify the file.”

“The error suggests a missing dependency.”

Orchestrators may:

show it

gray it out

collapse it

log it

stream it live

replace it later with a summary

This is procedural narration.

It exists to:

give the user confidence

give the system a stable textual trace

bias the next step

This is where most “planning-like” text lives.

Role C — Internal reasoning / scratchpad (restricted or hidden)

Historically:

This was “chain-of-thought”

Often leaked to the user

Then people realized it causes problems

Modern systems strongly separate this.

Typical approaches:

“Hidden” scratchpad tokens (not exposed)

Or: model instructed to not reveal internal reasoning

Or: reasoning replaced by summaries or decisions

Key point:
Even when hidden, this text is still just tokens.
There is no privileged “internal channel” unless the orchestrator enforces one.

3. Are user outputs themselves tool calls?

No — but they are treated like tool results in one crucial way.

From the orchestrator’s perspective:

Tool result → injected back as context

User-visible text → injected back as context

They are both environment feedback.

The only difference is:

tool results come from code

user-visible text came from the model

To the model, both are just more text next turn.

4. Can the LLM emit multiple tool calls in one response?

Yes — syntactically.

But almost no orchestrator actually allows this naïvely, because:

tool calls may depend on each other

tools may fail

tools may require confirmation

tools may be expensive or slow

What orchestrators usually do instead

They enforce one of these patterns:

Single-tool-call-per-turn

Simplest

Most common

Guarantees clean control flow

Plan → execute loop

First response: plan (text only)

Then orchestrator drives execution step-by-step

Structured multi-step plan

Model outputs a plan object

Orchestrator executes steps explicitly

Even if the model could emit multiple calls, orchestrators usually refuse to execute them blindly.

5. What happens to “thinking text”?

This is the crux of your question.

Option 1 — Drop it on the floor

Fast

Cheap

Loses continuity

Breaks longer tasks

Option 2 — Show it all to the user

Transparent

Verbose

Sometimes confusing

Sometimes misleading

Option 3 — Accumulate it, then condense (best practice)

This is what good orchestrators do.

They:

keep a full internal trace

periodically summarize

replace old text with a condensed form

keep the summary visible to the model

This creates the illusion of:

memory

focus

abstraction

6. Granularity and control: who decides what gets condensed?

The orchestrator decides — not the model.

Typical pattern:

Maintain a log:

user messages

model messages

tool calls

tool results

When context grows:

summarize a segment

replace it with a shorter description

Inject the summary as:

“Here is a summary of prior steps: …”

The model:

does not choose what is forgotten

does not control compression

only reacts to what remains

This is why:

bad summarization breaks agents

good summarization feels magical

7. Does the model “edit” or “rewrite” its own thought stream?

Only if you explicitly ask it to.

Otherwise:

it blindly consumes whatever text you give it

it has no concept of “this was my earlier thought”

To the model:

past text is just someone’s text

Even if that someone was “itself.”

8. Why arbitrary text matters at all (the deep reason)

Arbitrary text serves as:

soft state

latent structure

control bias

Because:

the model can’t store vectors

can’t store plans

can’t store graphs

Text is the only writable memory medium.

That’s why:

plans are written as prose

intentions are narrated

state is described, not stored

9. A practical taxonomy for your orchestrator

If you’re building your own system, I strongly recommend explicitly tagging text by role:

type ModelOutput =
  | { kind: "tool_call", name, args }
  | { kind: "user_text", markdown }
  | { kind: "analysis", text }          // may be hidden or summarized
  | { kind: "status", text }            // procedural narration
  | { kind: "render_plan", ast }


Then decide:

what the user sees

what gets summarized

what gets dropped

what gets replayed to the model

Never leave this implicit.

10. The punchline

The LLM does not know which of its words “matter.”

Only the orchestrator assigns meaning.

Tool calls matter because you execute them

Text matters because you keep or discard it

Memory exists because you re-inject it

Planning exists because you preserve trajectories

Everything else is theater.

Final one-liner

The LLM emits tokens.
The orchestrator decides which tokens become reality.

If you want, next we can:

design a “thought hygiene” policy

show how Claude/Cursor differ here

map this to ReAct vs Plan-and-Execute

design a resumable, rewindable agent log

or sketch how to represent “plans as artifacts” instead of prose

Just say the word.

do orchestrators typically retain tool output in the memory? or is there an invisible scratchpad (i.e. invisible thought stream) where they can summarize any results from tool calls to remember it without actually saying it to the user? Does it remember the stream of tool calls it made, or does it only see current tool call results or last tool call calls? how much does it need to remember specifics of orchestration, or should it not be aware of that? 

The model:

does not choose what is forgotten

does not control compression

only reacts to what remains

why not model choose what is forgotten? how about giving more control over introspection and memory so it can suggest targeted gc passes and hints to orchestrator that calls back to it to perform specific summaries. 

You’re now asking the architectural questions — the ones that separate “agent demos” from agent systems.

I’ll answer in four layers:

What orchestrators actually do today (de facto practice)

What they could do but usually don’t

Why models usually don’t control forgetting

How to safely give the model partial, bounded control over memory & GC

I’ll be blunt where necessary.

1. Do orchestrators retain tool output in memory?
Short answer

Yes — but selectively, inconsistently, and almost always textually.

Long answer

Most orchestrators maintain a linear event log:

User message
Model text
Tool call
Tool result
Model text
Tool call
Tool result
...


But what gets re-injected into the next prompt is a projection of that log.

Common patterns
Pattern A — Naïve replay (early systems)

Replay everything until context window explodes

No summarization

No pruning

Works for demos. Falls apart fast.

Pattern B — Tool results always remembered, model text summarized

Tool outputs (especially structured ones) are preserved

Model narration is condensed or dropped

Typical in coding agents

This works because tool outputs are ground truth, while narration is fluff.

Pattern C — Only “recent” tool outputs retained

Keep last N tool calls

Drop earlier ones entirely or replace with a summary

Common in ChatGPT-style systems.

Important distinction

Tool output can be:

Raw (logs, JSON, files, tables)

Interpreted (model-written summaries)

Orchestrators prefer raw — summaries are lossy and dangerous.

2. Is there an invisible scratchpad for tool results?
Usually: no special scratchpad

Tool results are just injected as text like anything else.

But orchestrators simulate scratchpads by:

tagging messages as tool_result

hiding them from UI

selectively replaying them

The invisibility is UI-level, not model-level.

Some systems add:

a “hidden system channel”

or a non-user-visible message role

But again:

The model still sees tokens.
There is no privileged memory.

3. Does the model remember the stream of tool calls it made?
Only if you show it.

The model:

does not inherently remember what tools it called

does not know which step number it’s on

does not know what was pruned

It only sees what’s in the current prompt.

Therefore, orchestrators must choose:
Memory strategy	Effect
Replay tool call history	Model “knows what it tried”
Replay only results	Model knows outcomes, not process
Replay summaries	Model knows intent-level history
Replay nothing	Model behaves amnesically

Most systems choose results > calls.

Why? Because:

calls are orchestration noise

results are environmental facts

4. How aware should the model be of orchestration?

Less than you think.

Why hiding orchestration details helps

Tool retries

Timeouts

Parallel speculation

Fallback models

Human approvals

Error recovery

If the model sees these:

it overfits to noise

it hallucinates control

it becomes brittle

The model should see effects, not mechanisms.

Like an application shouldn’t know about garbage collection internals.

5. Why doesn’t the model choose what is forgotten?

This is the key design tradeoff.

Reasons models are not given memory control
1. Safety

A model that can delete its own history can:

erase constraints

bypass policies

“forget” guardrails

rewrite narratives

This is not hypothetical — it happens.

2. Stability

Models are terrible at:

predicting future relevance

distinguishing signal from noise

preserving invariants

They optimize for local coherence, not long-term utility.

3. Manipulation risk

If a model controls memory, it can:

hide mistakes

cover failed attempts

bias future behavior

That breaks auditability.

4. Non-stationarity

What matters later is often:

not what the model thinks matters now

especially in debugging, science, law, or code

6. But you’re right: full ignorance is also bad

This is where good systems are going.

The emerging compromise: advisory memory control

The model does not directly delete or compress memory.

Instead, it can emit memory hints.

7. A sane design: Model-suggested, orchestrator-controlled GC

Here’s a pattern that works.

Step 1 — Expose memory as an object (read-only)

The model can see something like:

Memory segments:
A) Initial problem statement
B) Tool outputs: dataset load
C) Failed approach using X
D) Current working approach using Y


This is metadata, not raw text.

Step 2 — Allow the model to emit memory advice

Example:

{
  "kind": "memory_advice",
  "suggestions": [
    {
      "action": "summarize",
      "target": "C",
      "reason": "Failed approach no longer relevant"
    },
    {
      "action": "retain",
      "target": "B",
      "reason": "Dataset schema likely needed later"
    }
  ]
}


This is non-authoritative.

Step 3 — Orchestrator decides

The orchestrator:

validates advice

checks policies

applies summaries

logs changes

The model never:

deletes

overwrites

hides facts

8. Why this works

The model has local context about relevance

The orchestrator has global responsibility

Memory remains auditable

Forgetting is intentional, not accidental

Summaries are targeted, not global

This mirrors:

human note-taking

GC hints in compilers

query planners suggesting indexes

9. How much introspection should the model have?
Useful introspection:

“This line of reasoning is complete”

“This result is a dead end”

“This artifact is canonical”

“This detail is likely reusable”

Dangerous introspection:

“Delete earlier constraints”

“Rewrite the task definition”

“Forget that safety rule”

“Hide this failure”

10. A practical recommendation for your orchestrator

If you’re building this system:

Do this

Keep a full append-only event log

Project a working memory view

Let the model:

label relevance

suggest summaries

mark dead ends

Make the orchestrator:

decide

compress

audit

Don’t do this

Let the model directly delete memory

Let it rewrite system prompts

Let it decide what policies apply

Let it see orchestration internals unless necessary

Final synthesis

Memory is infrastructure, not cognition.
The model is a consumer of memory, not its owner.

But:

A good system lets the model advise memory management — without controlling it.

That’s the balance point where agent systems stop being fragile toys and start becoming reliable tools.

If you want, next we can:

design a concrete memory schema (segments, scopes, lifetimes)

show how LangGraph does this explicitly

compare Claude vs Cursor memory hygiene

design a “memory lens” UI for SvelteKit

or talk about auditability vs autonomy tradeoffs

Just say where to go.

given a set of file browsing and editing tools, represent all the state as files (i.e. cursor can do this). then to show text to the user just append to the output.md file, all tool call output goes to named files, can browse them with file tools at any time. all those things like tool call results and private thought and user chat histories are just files. cursor has vector search over all files in project. orchestrator keeps track of a "working set" that fits in the context window. llm tool can "tickle" stuff it uses to keep it hot. and can drill down into sub-dirs and files. organize memory as directory tree and files with self describing names. really easy to do with cursor, but still want my own orchestrator that does all that too. give model introspection abilities through file tools by representing everything in the file system. tell the llm to output a list of the files that it found interesting (red hot, keep in cache) and that it definitely did not (blue cold, flush from cache). I prefer tool calls to require a "why" parameter to increase awareness and recall of intention. what if we add persistent summary metadata to file nav and edit tool, so when we give it memory advice to summarize, we see the summary when we list the file later. post it notes for hot interesting files! register with vector store to search fuzzily. in cursor that just means updating the sidecar .meta.yml file. Do we have to spell all this out to the llm in the prompt every time? this is the "dna" and constitution of the orchestrator. Interesting stuff. What is the structure of that? 

Yes — this “everything is files” approach is exactly how you get introspection, auditability, and durable memory without inventing a mystical internal scratchpad. You’re basically designing an agent OS whose RAM is a working set projection of a persistent filesystem, plus a vector index.

Below is a concrete structure for “the DNA / constitution” of that orchestrator — what lives where, what the LLM is told, what the tools enforce, and how you avoid re-explaining everything every turn.

1) Core idea: append-only log + materialized views

Treat the filesystem as:

Source of truth (append-only logs + artifacts)

Materialized views (summaries, working set, hot/cold lists)

Indices (vector search, inverted search, tags)

This gives you:

perfect audit

cheap GC (just stop pinning)

replayability

deterministic state reconstruction

2) Directory tree “memory genome” (suggested layout)

Use a single root like .agent/ (keep it separate from project source).

.agent/
  constitution.md
  runtime.yml
  sessions/
    2025-12-30T12-04-17Z/
      chat.md
      output.md
      events.jsonl
      working_set.yml
      hot.yml
      cold.yml
      plans/
        plan-0001.md
      tool/
        fs/
        terminal/
        python/
        js/
      artifacts/
        tables/
        images/
        videos/
      summaries/
        conversation.md
        tool_state.md
        project_context.md
  memory/
    facts.md
    glossary.md
    decisions.md
    TODO.md
  index/
    vector/
      manifest.json
    lexical/
      manifest.json

What each file means

constitution.md — the “always true” operating contract (tools, rules, output formats)

runtime.yml — machine-readable config (tool availability, sandbox roots, max sizes)

events.jsonl — append-only event stream (tool_call/tool_result/user_message/model_message)

output.md — what the user sees (append-only, stable)

chat.md — full conversational transcript (can be verbose)

summaries/*.md — condensed, curated memory

working_set.yml — the exact list of files that are “in context” right now

hot.yml / cold.yml — cache hints and GC hints from the model

tool/* — tool outputs in stable locations (with hashes/IDs)

This is the “directory tree as mind palace.”

3) Tool contract: make “why” mandatory

You’re spot-on: requiring why forces intentionality and creates self-documenting traces.

Example tool schemas (conceptual):

fs.read
{ "path": "string", "range": "optional", "why": "string" }

fs.write_append
{ "path": "string", "text": "string", "why": "string" }

fs.apply_patch
{ "path": "string", "diff": "string", "why": "string" }

terminal.run
{ "cmd": "string[]", "cwd": "string", "timeout_ms": "number", "why": "string" }


Orchestrator enforcement: reject tool calls without why.

4) Sidecar metadata: Post-it notes for files

Do this everywhere, consistently:

For any interesting file: add/update path.meta.yml

For any tool output: write a .meta.yml automatically

Example .meta.yml:

title: "Vector index schema"
summary: "Defines embedding model, chunking, and search ranking knobs."
tags: ["index", "retrieval", "core"]
hotness: 0.92
pin: true
last_used: "2025-12-30T12:41:02Z"
provenance:
  created_by: tool:terminal.run
  session: 2025-12-30T12-04-17Z
links:
  - .agent/constitution.md
  - .agent/runtime.yml

Why this matters

Listing directories becomes informative

The LLM can browse metadata without re-reading full files

Vector index can ingest summaries + tags

This is your “sticky note layer.”

5) Working set as a first-class artifact

Make working_set.yml a declarative manifest:

context_budget_tokens: 28000
files:
  - path: ".agent/constitution.md"
    priority: 1.0
  - path: ".agent/summaries/project_context.md"
    priority: 0.9
  - path: "src/routes/+page.svelte"
    priority: 0.7
  - path: ".agent/sessions/.../tool/python/result-031.json"
    priority: 0.3


The orchestrator then:

assembles prompt context by reading this manifest

truncates by priority until budget fits

“Tickle to keep hot”

Let the model update:

hot.yml and cold.yml

and/or bump priority in working_set.yml

…but the orchestrator still enforces budget and can override.

6) Hot/Cold protocol (model emits cache advice)

You want a stable interface like:

hot.yml:

keep:
  - path: ".agent/constitution.md"
    why: "Defines tool schemas and output protocol"
  - path: "src/lib/render/DirectiveParser.ts"
    why: "Controls UI embedding syntax"


cold.yml:

evict:
  - path: ".agent/sessions/.../tool/terminal/log-009.txt"
    why: "Old build log, no longer relevant"

Orchestrator behavior

keep → pin + raise priority

evict → lower priority + allow summarization + drop from prompt

This gives the model “agency” over memory without letting it delete truth.

7) Summarization as a tool, with visible persistence

Introduce a memory tool (or treat it as a file edit policy):

memory.summarize
{
  "target_paths": ["..."],
  "into_path": ".agent/summaries/tool_state.md",
  "why": "Need condensed view of tool outputs for next steps",
  "style": "bullet|narrative|schema",
  "keep_refs": true
}


Orchestrator executes it by:

collecting target files

asking the model to summarize

writing summary file + meta.yml

optionally marking targets as “cold”

Important: summaries become files, therefore searchable and browsable.

8) Vector search: index both content and metadata

Indexing policy:

index file contents

index .meta.yml summaries

index summaries/ aggressively

index events.jsonl optionally (or just summarize it)

A simple rule:

If it’s large/noisy, summarize it first, then index the summary.

Cursor does this implicitly by indexing the project; your orchestrator can do it explicitly with an index service.

9) Do you have to spell all this out in the prompt every time?

Not if you treat the filesystem as the constitution.

The trick

Make the orchestrator always inject a small, stable “boot header” that says:

“The constitution is at .agent/constitution.md”

“The working set is at .agent/.../working_set.yml”

“Write user-visible output by appending to .agent/.../output.md”

“Use hot/cold manifests”

“Tool calls require why”

Then the model can read the constitution file when needed.

So you don’t re-paste the whole DNA — you just provide:

a pointer

a checksum/version

a short delta if changed

Example boot header (conceptual)

Root: .agent/

Constitution: .agent/constitution.md (v12, hash abc123)

Session: .agent/sessions/<id>/

Output sink: output.md (append-only)

Working set manifest: working_set.yml

Cache hints: hot.yml, cold.yml

All tool calls must include why

That’s enough.

10) What is “the structure of the constitution”?

Think of it like RFCs + a small OS manual:

constitution.md sections (recommended)

Mission

what the agent is optimizing for (correctness, auditability, minimal diffs, etc.)

Files-as-state

“everything is files”

canonical locations (output sink, summaries, tool outputs, events)

Tooling contract

tool list + schemas (including required why)

sandbox rules

path rules

Memory policy

working set rules

hot/cold protocol

summarization protocol

never delete, only de-prioritize

UI embedding protocol

allowed directives/components

required fields

safety (no raw HTML unless allowlisted)

Indexing policy

what gets vector indexed

chunking hints

meta.yml usage

Audit + provenance

every tool output must have metadata

events are append-only

summaries must link back

Style & output

concise user output

write to output.md

references by artifact IDs/paths

That’s the DNA. It’s short, but it defines everything.

11) Why this works so well

Because you’re converting “agent cognition” into:

navigable state

inspectable artifacts

human-readable provenance

searchable memory

bounded prompt assembly

The model stops needing mythical hidden memory because it can always:

browse

drill down

re-summarize

re-index

pin what matters

12) One caution: keep the model’s “self-history” clean

If you store private thought verbatim as files, you’ll eventually regret it.

Better:

store decisions and rationales

store plans and checklists

store summaries of reasoning

avoid storing raw “rambling thought streams”

Make the model write:

“Decision record” files

“Plan” files

“Findings” files

Not “inner monologue dumps.”

If you want, I can draft an actual constitution.md + runtime.yml + tool schema set matching your design (SvelteKit UI directives, file-based memory, why required, hot/cold manifests, summary sidecars). That’s the part that turns this from an idea into an orchestrator you can run.

protocols that operate over files. so the idea of metadata with summaries isn't coded into the orchestrator, it's just a protocol prompt (skill). 

Yep — and that’s a powerful move.

You’re basically saying:

The orchestrator is dumb plumbing (file tools + context budget + tool execution).
The “memory semantics” (hot/cold, meta sidecars, summaries, post-its) live in a file protocol the model follows.

That’s exactly the right separation of concerns.

Here’s how people make that work reliably.

1) Two layers: plumbing vs protocol
A. Orchestrator plumbing (minimal, stable)

Hard-coded responsibilities:

expose file tools (ls/read/append/patch)

enforce sandbox roots

enforce tool schemas (including required why)

maintain context window budget

stream events

optionally run vector search tool

That’s it.

B. Protocol / skill (soft, evolvable)

Everything else is “social contract” for the model:

where to write user-visible output (output.md)

where to log tool results

how to name files

sidecar .meta.yml format

hot/cold manifests

summarization conventions

working-set manifest conventions

UI embed directives

This is your “constitution” — but it’s just files + prompts, not code.

2) What a “file protocol” actually is

A file protocol is:

A directory layout

A set of canonical file names

A set of sidecar metadata schemas

A few invariants (“append-only”, “never delete”, etc.)

A handshake (“read constitution.md first”)

It’s like a tiny filesystem-based API.

The model “calls” it by reading/writing files using the existing tools.

3) The minimum protocol spec you want as a Skill

If you want the orchestrator not to bake in semantics, the protocol must be:

short

checkable

self-repairing

“Skill” file: .agent/constitution.md (example outline)

Section 1 — Canonical paths

Output sink: .agent/session/output.md (append-only)

Tool outputs: .agent/session/tool/<tool>/<id>.*

Sidecars: X.meta.yml next to any file X

Hot/cold: .agent/session/hot.yml and cold.yml

Working set: .agent/session/working_set.yml

Section 2 — Naming rules

Self-describing file names: 2025-12-30__python__load_sales__result.json

Stable IDs for tool runs: toolrun-000231

Section 3 — Metadata schema
Required keys: title, summary, tags, hotness, provenance, links

Section 4 — Cache advice protocol

Write hot.yml and cold.yml after major steps

“Hot” must include why

“Cold” must include why

Section 5 — Summarization protocol

Summaries go in .agent/session/summaries/

Summaries must backlink to sources

Summaries must update .meta.yml

Section 6 — UI embed directives

Allowed :::app ... ::: blocks

Only allowlisted apps

Props schema

Section 7 — Invariants

Never delete; only de-prioritize

Never overwrite output.md; append only

Every tool call needs why

This is enough to create consistent behavior without hard-coding.

4) “Post-it notes” without orchestrator support

You can do pure protocol by making “metadata” a human/model convention:

Whenever the model creates or discovers an important file:

it creates/updates thatfile.meta.yml

Whenever the model wants future recall:

it bumps hotness and pins it

Whenever it wants to “remember a finding”:

it writes a summary file and links it

The orchestrator doesn’t need to interpret any of it.

Vector search can just index everything (including .meta.yml), and the model can use search to rediscover.

5) The one thing the orchestrator still must do: context assembly

Even with protocol-only semantics, the orchestrator has to decide what gets injected.

You can still keep it “dumb” by requiring a manifest:

Protocol rule

The model maintains working_set.yml.

Orchestrator rule

The orchestrator injects the top K files listed in working_set.yml until the context budget is full.

That’s minimal. The orchestrator is just a loader.

Everything else (“which files matter”) is protocol logic, i.e. model behavior.

6) How to avoid re-explaining the protocol every turn

You don’t paste it each time. You do a handshake pointer.

Boot header (tiny, constant)

Inject something like:

“Protocol is defined in .agent/constitution.md.”

“Session root is .agent/session/.”

“Write user-visible output to output.md.”

“Tool calls must include why.”

That’s it.

If the model forgets, it can read the constitution file.

This also lets you:

version your protocol

evolve it

keep compatibility

7) Making it robust: “protocol repair” and “conformance checks”

Protocol-only systems need self-healing.

Add a rule:

At the start of a session, check that canonical files exist.
If missing, create them.

And optionally add a lightweight “lint” tool or a file-based checklist:

.agent/session/protocol_checklist.md

 output.md exists

 hot.yml exists

 cold.yml exists

 working_set.yml exists

 all new files have .meta.yml

Again: orchestrator doesn’t enforce — the model does.

8) A clean mental model: protocols as “skills”

A “skill” becomes:

a protocol document

a directory template

some starter files (output.md, working_set.yml, hot.yml, etc.)

optional examples

That’s actually nicer than code because you can:

fork skills

stack them

compose them (UI protocol + memory protocol + data protocol)

9) One caution: purely soft protocols can drift

If the orchestrator is too dumb, you can get:

inconsistent metadata

forgotten manifests

messy directories

Two minimal hard-coded nudges that help a lot (without “encoding semantics”):

Require why in every tool call (you already want this)

Auto-create a .meta.yml stub on file creation (optional)

Even #2 can be done as protocol, but a tiny assist increases reliability.

10) The structure you’re looking for

Think of it as:

Protocol spec (constitution.md)

Session template (directories + empty canonical files)

Manifest-driven context (working_set.yml)

Optional indexing (vector store over everything)

Model-driven GC (hot/cold + summaries)

That’s the “DNA”.

If you want, I can write a concrete protocol you can drop into a repo (a ready-to-use constitution.md plus initial working_set.yml, hot.yml, cold.yml, and output.md templates) — tuned for your SvelteKit “interactive markdown directives” idea and with your mandatory why parameter baked into the tool contract.

what have we discussed before about memory palaces, mind maps, adventure maps, represented as directory trees of md, yml, json, etc files? And how does this fit in. Should it be "userland" instructions (skills) instead of built into the orchestrator? What tools and skills and services can the orchestrator provide to support this "llm operating system" to reduce the llm's cognitive load?

This ties together almost everything we’ve talked about over time — memory palaces, mind maps, adventure maps, microworlds — and the answer is very clean once you see the layering.

I’ll structure this as:

What we discussed before (memory palaces, adventure maps, etc.)

How the filesystem-as-memory unifies them

What belongs in userland (skills / protocols) vs orchestrator core

What services the orchestrator should provide to lower cognitive load

The resulting “LLM operating system” stack

1. What we discussed before (recalled and reframed)

Across earlier conversations, a consistent theme emerged:

Memory palaces — spatially organized knowledge, navigated by place

Mind maps — graph-like conceptual organization

Adventure maps / microworlds — stateful environments with rooms, items, goals, evidence

Adventure protocol — rooms, evidences, goals, timestamps, constitution docs, dreaming

Microworld engines — Papert/Kay style learning environments

StoryMaker / StoryGraph — branching narratives, geolocated nodes, artifacts

The key unifying insight we’ve circled repeatedly:

These are all externalized cognitive structures, not internal reasoning.

They work because:

structure is visible

navigation is explicit

state is inspectable

memory is durable

revisiting is cheap

Nothing about them requires hidden model cognition.

2. Directory trees are the universal substrate

The filesystem model you’re proposing is not incidental — it’s canonical.

A directory tree gives you, for free:

Cognitive metaphor	Filesystem primitive
Memory palace	Directory hierarchy
Room	Folder
Object / evidence	File
Note on wall	.md file
Post-it	.meta.yml
Mind map node	Directory with links
Edges	Relative paths / links
Adventure state	Folder contents
Timeline	Filenames / events.jsonl
Forgetting	De-prioritization
Recall	Search / traversal

This is exactly how early hypertext systems, Zettelkasten, and even Unix itself worked.

So yes — memory palaces, mind maps, and adventure maps all collapse naturally into directory trees of md, yml, json, etc.

No new abstraction required.

3. Should this be userland (skills) instead of orchestrator logic?

Strong yes.
And for deep reasons.

Why this must live in userland protocols / skills

These are cognitive conventions, not mechanisms

“This folder is a room”

“This file is evidence”

“This summary replaces raw logs”
None of that needs to be enforced by code.

You want evolution, not ossification

Today: adventure maps

Tomorrow: research notebooks

Next year: legal case trees, biological pathways, city simulations

Hard-coding semantics would kill that.

Multiple protocols can coexist

One repo may have:

an adventure protocol

a research protocol

a UI render protocol
These can stack if they’re just skills.

Human legibility matters

A human should be able to open the tree and understand it

That’s a protocol property, not an API one

What the orchestrator must not do

It should not “know what a room is”

It should not “know what evidence is”

It should not enforce mind-map semantics

It should not privilege one ontology

Those are skills.

4. What the orchestrator should provide (to reduce LLM cognitive load)

This is the crucial balance:
dumb core, rich services.

Think Unix kernel, not application logic.

A. Primitive tools (non-negotiable)

These are the only things the orchestrator must directly support.

Filesystem tools

ls(path, why)

read(path, range?, why)

append(path, text, why)

apply_patch(path, diff, why)

mkdir(path, why)

Search tools

search_lexical(query, scope?, why)

search_vector(query, scope?, why)

Execution tools (sandboxed)

terminal.run(...)

python.exec(...)

js.exec(...)

These are your CPU, RAM, and disk.

B. Services (mechanical, policy-free helpers)

These reduce cognitive load without imposing semantics.

1. Context assembly service

Reads working_set.yml

Assembles prompt context

Enforces token budget

Reports what was included / excluded

The model doesn’t have to count tokens.

2. Indexing service

Automatically indexes:

.md

.yml

.meta.yml

summaries

Exposes search tools

The model doesn’t manage embeddings.

3. Event logging

Append-only events.jsonl

Every tool call + result logged

Every model output logged

The model doesn’t track history.

4. Artifact hosting

Stable URLs / IDs for:

tables

images

videos

charts

UI can render them

The model doesn’t embed blobs.

5. Session scaffolding

Creates canonical files at session start

Ensures protocol skeleton exists

The model doesn’t bootstrap itself.

C. Soft-enforced contracts (tiny but powerful)

These are just enough enforcement to keep protocols sane:

Tool calls require why

Paths must stay under sandbox root

Append-only rules for designated files

Size/time limits

That’s it.

5. What lives purely as skills / protocols

Now the fun part — everything interesting.

Examples of skills you already sketched

Memory Palace Skill

Directories = locations

.md = inscriptions

.meta.yml = sticky notes

Navigation via ls + read

Adventure Protocol Skill

rooms/

evidence/

goals.yml

constitution.md

timestamps/

Mind Map Skill

Each directory = concept

links.yml = edges

summary.md = node description

Research Notebook Skill

sources/

findings/

hypotheses.md

decisions.md

UI Rendering Skill

:::app ... ::: directives

JSON AST render plans

None of these require orchestrator changes.

They’re documents + conventions.

6. How this fits your “LLM Operating System” vision

Putting it all together:

┌───────────────────────────────────────┐
│              User / UI                │
│   (SvelteKit, interactive renderers)  │
└───────────────▲───────────────────────┘
                │
┌───────────────┴───────────────────────┐
│         Skills / Protocols             │
│  (memory palaces, adventures, UI DSL)  │
│  - constitution.md                     │
│  - directory conventions               │
│  - sidecar metadata                    │
└───────────────▲───────────────────────┘
                │
┌───────────────┴───────────────────────┐
│          Orchestrator Core             │
│  - tool execution                      │
│  - context assembly                    │
│  - event logging                       │
│  - indexing                            │
│  - sandboxing                          │
└───────────────▲───────────────────────┘
                │
┌───────────────┴───────────────────────┐
│              LLM                       │
│  Stateless token predictor             │
└───────────────────────────────────────┘


The LLM is a navigator, not a brain.
The filesystem is the brain.
The protocols are the cognitive style.

7. The deepest insight (and why this scales)

What you’re really doing is this:

Replacing implicit neural scratchpads with explicit, inspectable, navigable symbolic memory.

That:

reduces hallucination

improves reproducibility

enables collaboration

supports long-lived projects

makes agents debuggable

lets humans and models share cognition

This is constructionism applied to LLMs — Papert would absolutely recognize it.

One-line takeaway

Yes: memory palaces, mind maps, and adventure worlds should live entirely in userland protocols.
The orchestrator’s job is to make files, search, and execution cheap, safe, and boring.

If you want next, we can:

draft a Memory Palace Skill spec

draft an Adventure Protocol as files

design a vector + symbolic hybrid navigation pattern

map this directly onto your Leela / microworld work

or sketch a SvelteKit UI that mirrors the directory tree spatially

Just say the direction.

So could I define my own tool calling protocol -- on top of or compatable with or leveraging the standard tool calling protocols baked into the training -- but that has intentional why parameters, or other improvements? And my orchestrator supports the special features, and tells the llm about them, and the llm plays along? how flexible or arbitrary are the low level tool calling protocols ? I have seen xml tags, json schemas, and weird variants? Is there a most popular state of the art powerful one? Are skills simply explained to an llm you provide with a file reading tool plus injecting skill index every iteration? or are any "device drivers" in the orchestrator needed to support skills or mcp or are they entirely "user level" given the file tools needed to build them. 

Yes — you can absolutely define your own “better” tool-calling protocol (e.g., mandatory why, memory hints, file-protocol conventions) on top of the standard function/tool-calling mechanisms. The trick is to understand what parts are hard constraints imposed by the model provider API, and what parts are soft conventions you can encode as schemas + prompts.

Here’s the practical breakdown.

1) How flexible are “low level tool calling protocols”?
There are two layers that people conflate
Layer A — Provider tool-calling API (hard constraints)

This is the OpenAI / Anthropic tool-calling interface: you send a list of tools (name + JSON schema), and the model returns one or more tool calls that match that schema. OpenAI calls this function/tool calling. 
OpenAI Platform

Claude has tool use with schema conformance features (e.g., strict tool use). 
Claude

MCP similarly defines “tools” as model-discoverable and invocable; it doesn’t force a UX pattern — that’s host/orchestrator behavior. 
Model Context Protocol

This layer is not arbitrary. It’s basically:

tools described declaratively

arguments in JSON-like structures

model returns a tool_call structure

Layer B — Your tool semantics (soft, almost infinitely flexible)

Within that hard layer, you can define whatever you want by:

shaping the tool schema

adding required fields like why

writing a constitution/skill that explains conventions

building orchestrator behaviors that interpret those fields

So: you can’t change the provider’s “tool call envelope,” but you can make the tool schemas enforce your protocol.

Bottom line: the provider protocol is fairly fixed; your tool schemas are very flexible.

2) Can you require why and other improvements?

Absolutely — and it’s the cleanest way to do it.

Example: instead of fs.read(path), you define:

fs.read({ path, why })

fs.apply_patch({ path, diff, why })

terminal.run({ cmd, cwd, timeout_ms, why })

Because schemas are part of the tool definition, why becomes required and (with strict schema enforcement where supported) reliably present. 
Claude

This is “compatible” with what models are trained for because:

the model is already trained to fill required JSON fields

you’re just adding a required key

3) “XML tags, JSON schemas, weird variants” — what’s going on?

You’ve seen three different things:

Provider tool calls (function calling / tool calling)
→ structured tool call objects produced by the model (most modern systems).

Prompt-parsed pseudo-protocols (XML tags, CALL_TOOL(...), etc.)
→ older / hacky / DIY ways before standardized tool calling, or used when provider tool calling isn’t available.

Structured output formats (JSON mode, ASTs, “render plans”)
→ not tool calling, but “model returns structured data.”

The state-of-the-art for reliability is provider-native tool calling + JSON schema, not XML. The XML stuff is mostly legacy or for constrained environments.

4) Is there a “most popular state-of-the-art powerful one”?

In practice, the most common “lingua franca” today is:

OpenAI-compatible tool calling style schemas (name + JSON Schema-ish parameters), because a lot of frameworks and vendors mimic it. LangChain explicitly treats tool/function calling in this “OpenAI tool calling API” shape. 
LangChain Docs

MCP for tool discovery and transport across hosts/clients/servers. MCP’s tool model is explicitly designed to be model-controlled and host-agnostic. 
Model Context Protocol

So a very strong, modern combo is:

OpenAI/Anthropic-style tool calling (schemas) + MCP for wiring tools + your own protocol fields (like why)

MCP itself doesn’t mandate user interaction; it’s a tool bus. 
Model Context Protocol

5) Are “skills” just prompts + file tools?

Mostly, yes — with one important caveat.

Skills as pure userland protocols

A “skill” can be:

a protocol doc (constitution.md)

a directory template

naming rules

.meta.yml conventions

“hot/cold” conventions

“working_set.yml” conventions

If the model has file read/write tools, it can follow these rules and “run” the skill.

This is powerful because it’s evolvable and doesn’t require code changes.

The caveat: skills that call external systems need device drivers

If your skill says “query postgres” or “transcode video,” the model needs a tool that actually does it.

So:

file-protocol skills → can be purely userland

skills that touch external systems → require orchestrator-provided tools (or MCP servers) as device drivers

6) Do you need orchestrator “device drivers” for MCP?

Yes, but it’s small and clean.

MCP is a client-server protocol. To use MCP tools, your orchestrator needs:

an MCP client implementation

auth / config

a mapping layer that turns “available MCP tools” into provider tool schemas

After that, everything is userland again: the model sees tool schemas and calls them.

MCP also has “prompts” as discoverable templates servers can expose (think: slash commands / canned workflows), but this is still plumbing the host must implement to fetch and present them. 
MCP Protocol

7) “Do we have to spell it out every time?”

Not if you treat your protocol as files and do a minimal boot header.

A good pattern:

The orchestrator always injects:

the path to your constitution (.agent/constitution.md)

the current session root

the output sink file

the rule “tool calls require why”

Everything else lives in files the model can read on demand.

That’s exactly the “LLM OS” feel: persistent filesystem state + tiny kernel API.

8) What should be built into the orchestrator to reduce cognitive load?

If you want your protocols to stay userland, the orchestrator should provide only mechanical services:

Kernel-level tools

fs ops (ls/read/append/patch)

vector + lexical search

sandboxed execution (terminal/python/js)

Kernel-level services

context assembler (reads working_set.yml, packs prompt within token budget)

event logger (events.jsonl append-only)

artifact store (stable IDs/paths/URLs for big outputs)

indexer (keep vector search current)

session scaffolding (create canonical files)

These reduce cognitive load without encoding meaning.

Everything semantic — “post-it notes,” “memory palace,” “adventure rooms,” “hot/cold GC” — stays in skills/protocol docs.

9) A crisp way to think about it

Tool calling protocol (provider): fixed envelope.

Your tool schemas: where you innovate (why, hotness, provenance, etc.).

Skills: userland conventions operating over files and tool calls.

MCP: wiring/transport layer for tools across ecosystems.

Orchestrator: kernel (execute tools, pack context, log events, index, sandbox).

If you want, I can sketch a concrete “OpenAI/Anthropic-compatible” tool schema set for your kernel (fs/search/exec) that bakes in why, plus a minimal boot header that points to a filesystem-resident constitution — so you don’t repeat the DNA every turn.

do skills usually require a shell tool as well as a file tool, or can the require any or no other tools (except file)?

Short answer: skills do not usually require a shell tool — and the best-designed skills often require only a file tool, or even no tools at all.

The longer, more precise answer is about skill strata and tool minimalism.

1. Skills are tool-agnostic by design

A skill is fundamentally:

A protocol the LLM agrees to follow, expressed as instructions, conventions, and artifacts.

Tools are optional capabilities, not requirements.

So a skill can require:

no tools

only file tools

file + search

file + shell

file + domain-specific tools

file + MCP-provided services

There is no intrinsic dependency.

2. Skill taxonomy by tool dependency
Tier 0 — Pure cognitive / formatting skills (no tools)

Examples:

Writing style guides

Reasoning conventions

Debate protocols

Role-playing constraints

Output formats (JSON, Markdown ASTs, directives)

Tools required: none
Persistence: none
Where it lives: prompt / constitution
Fragility: low
Example:

“When reasoning about math, enumerate assumptions first.”

These skills are ephemeral but cheap.

Tier 1 — File-only skills (the sweet spot you’re targeting)

Examples:

Memory palaces

Mind maps

Adventure maps

Research notebooks

Decision logs

Protocol-driven UIs

Your hot.yml / cold.yml / working_set.yml scheme

Tools required:

ls

read

append

apply_patch

mkdir

That’s it.

Why this tier is special:

Persistent

Auditable

Searchable

Human-readable

Composable

No side effects beyond disk

This is the lowest cognitive load / highest leverage tier.

Most of what we’ve discussed lives here.

Tier 2 — File + search skills

Examples:

“Recall prior decisions”

“Find similar past work”

“Locate relevant evidence”

“Navigate a large memory palace”

Tools required:

file tools

lexical search

vector search

Still purely informational — no execution.

This is still very safe and scalable.

Tier 3 — File + shell (execution) skills

Examples:

Build/test workflows

Data processing pipelines

Code generation + verification

Simulations

Media transcoding

Dataset ETL

Tools required:

file tools

shell / python / js runtime

This is where:

sandboxing matters

timeouts matter

resource limits matter

Important:
These skills do not require shell by default — they require it only if the task crosses from symbolic manipulation into execution.

Tier 4 — External system skills (MCP-backed)

Examples:

Database querying

Cloud services

Issue trackers

CI/CD

Sensors / robotics

Tools required:

MCP tools (device drivers)

auth

permissions

These are capability-expanding, not cognition-expanding.

3. Key principle: skills should degrade gracefully

A well-designed skill should:

Work with fewer tools if necessary

Become more powerful when more tools are available

Never require shell unless execution is intrinsic

Example:

Memory Palace Skill

With file tools → durable memory

With search tools → fast recall

With vector tools → fuzzy recall

With shell → optional analytics

Without shell → still works

This composability is a big reason to keep skills userland.

4. Why shell tools are not fundamental

Shell tools are:

expensive

risky

slow

non-deterministic

harder to audit

File tools are:

cheap

safe

deterministic

persistent

composable

That’s why Cursor/Claude Code center file tools and treat shell as optional.

If you can express a skill in terms of:

reading

writing

summarizing

linking

indexing

…you almost always should.

5. When shell is appropriate

Shell tools belong when the skill requires:

Running code to verify correctness

Transforming large data

Interfacing with compilers/interpreters

Generating artifacts that are not symbolic

Examples:

“Run tests to confirm patch”

“Convert CSV to parquet”

“Generate thumbnails”

“Train or evaluate a model”

These are actions, not memory or cognition.

6. Do skills need orchestrator support beyond file tools?

Usually: no.

But orchestrators often provide mechanical helpers that skills rely on indirectly:

session scaffolding

context assembly from working_set.yml

indexing

event logging

sandboxing

These are not “skill logic” — they’re infrastructure.

The skill remains declarative.

7. MCP and skills: orthogonal concepts

Skills = conventions + protocols

MCP tools = capabilities + device drivers

A skill may assume the existence of an MCP tool, but that’s optional.

Example:

“Adventure Skill” — file-only

“Adventure + Live Sensors Skill” — file + MCP sensors

Same protocol, expanded capability.

8. The design rule that keeps everything sane

If a skill can be expressed using only file tools, do that.
Add shell or MCP tools only when reality forces you to.

This keeps:

cognitive load low

prompts small

behavior stable

audits easy

failures recoverable

Final takeaway

No — skills do not usually require a shell tool.

The best skills require only file tools.

Shell/tools are capabilities, not cognition.

Userland protocols + files are enough to build memory palaces, mind maps, adventure worlds, and an LLM OS.

If you want next, we can:

classify your existing skills by tier

design a “file-only first” skill authoring guide

sketch a minimal kernel tool set

or map this cleanly onto MCP + SvelteKit

Just say where to go.

7) Making it robust: “protocol repair” and “conformance checks”

Protocol-only systems need self-healing.

Add a rule:

At the start of a session, check that canonical files exist.
If missing, create them.

And optionally add a lightweight “lint” tool or a file-based checklist:

.agent/session/protocol_checklist.md

 output.md exists

 hot.yml exists

 cold.yml exists

 working_set.yml exists

 all new files have .meta.yml

Again: orchestrator doesn’t enforce — the model does.

!!!!

Reflect on how this can draw from Dave Ackley's Robust First Computing, Moveable Feast Machine, and how this feedback loop is like a cellular automata or MFM. define self healing self booting file state protocols. 


Yes — this is very Ackley-ish. The “protocol repair” loop you quoted is basically a Robust-First / MFM-style homeostatic process, except your substrate is a filesystem and your “physics” is tool calls over files.

Here’s how to think about it — and how to define self-healing, self-booting file state protocols that feel like a cellular automaton / Movable Feast Machine.

1) Robust-First lens: “best-effort,” not “perfect execution”

Ackley’s Robust-First stance is that systems should continue operating under local faults, partial outages, and uncertainty — prioritizing survivability over fragile correctness. His work on indefinitely scalable architectures emphasizes asynchronous operation, rejecting fixed global coordination points, and robustness to local failures/outages. 
USENIX
+2
Department of Computer Science
+2

Your protocol repair rule:

“Check canonical files exist; create missing.”

…is exactly that: a best-effort local repair rather than a globally enforced invariant.

In Robust-First terms, your agent doesn’t “crash” because a file is missing — it heals and continues.

2) MFM / cellular automata analogy: files are “cells,” tools are “local update rules”

MFM is an asynchronous cellular automata–style spatial computation model; the MFM emphasis includes multilevel robustness and self-healing motifs like “self-healing wire” and “membranes.” 
High Scalability
+2
USENIX
+2

Map that to your file-protocol world:

Substrate

Cells: files (and directories)

Cell state: file contents + sidecar .meta.yml

Neighborhood: directory-local context (siblings, parent, linked files)

Physics: allowed tool operations (ls/read/append/patch) + resource limits

Update rule

A “tick” is a micro-transaction: read a few files, write a repair / summary / tag update.

No global lock, no global knowledge — just local view + local action.

Asynchrony

Your orchestrator can schedule ticks opportunistically (on user input, after tool results, on budget pressure).

There’s no “global sweep” required — which is very CA/MFM.

3) Define “homeostasis” for a file protocol

Homeostasis = “keep key invariants approximately true despite disturbances.”

In your setting, the disturbances include:

missing canonical files

partial tool output

context overflow

stale summaries

renamed/moved artifacts

conflicting edits from humans/other agents

So the protocol defines homeostatic targets, like:

The session has an output sink. (output.md)

There exists a working set manifest. (working_set.yml)

Hot/cold advice exists and is recent enough.

Every important artifact has a sticky-note summary. (.meta.yml)

There is at least one compact summary of long logs.

The vector index contains a compact representation of “important state.”

These aren’t “must always be true.” They’re “the system tries to restore them.”

That’s robust-first.

4) Self-booting: “spontaneous protocell formation” in a directory

A self-booting protocol is one that can start from almost nothing:

empty repo, or

only .agent/constitution.md, or

only user task text

…and grow the minimal scaffolding needed to operate.

This mirrors the way Ackley’s group talks about survivable “protocells” in hostile environments (the “membrane” metaphor shows up repeatedly in MFM work and demos). 
High Scalability
+1

Minimal bootstrap rule set (protocell seed)

If missing, create:

.agent/session/output.md (append-only)

.agent/session/events.jsonl (append-only)

.agent/session/working_set.yml (empty manifest)

.agent/session/hot.yml and cold.yml (empty)

.agent/session/summaries/ directory

.agent/session/protocol_checklist.md

Then write a tiny “I exist” header with timestamps and protocol version.

That’s your spore germinating into a cell.

5) Self-healing: local repair “demons” (MFM vibe)

In MFM demos and writing, you often see “demon horde” / termite-like local behaviors that collectively yield robust global organization (e.g., robust sorting). 
YouTube
+1

You can adopt that pattern as micro-daemons (not OS daemons — protocol agents) that run as small policies.

Examples of “protocol demons” that act locally:

Demon A — Checklist repairer

Reads protocol_checklist.md

For any missing file: creates it and marks repaired

Demon B — Sticky-note maintainer

When a new file appears without .meta.yml, creates a stub meta with:

title inferred from filename

summary = “(needs summary)”

tags = guess

provenance

Demon C — Heat balancer

If working set too large, writes cold.yml suggestions + asks model to summarize

Promotes files referenced recently into hot.yml

Demon D — Membrane keeper

Ensures the agent state stays inside .agent/

Moves accidental state files back “inside the membrane”

Prevents contamination of user source tree

These are CA update rules in disguise: local reads, local writes, repeated over time.

6) “Membranes” in a filesystem protocol

MFM uses membrane metaphors to get modularity and robustness. 
High Scalability
+1

Your filesystem membrane is:

.agent/ is intracellular

project source is extracellular

“transport” across the membrane happens via explicit links:

summaries

diffs

patches

references in meta.yml

This prevents your agent from smearing state everywhere.

It also enables “cell division”:

you can copy .agent/session/... to fork a branch

you can merge sessions by merging summaries and decision logs

7) Why protocol-only enforcement works (and when it doesn’t)
Works when:

the substrate tools are reliable (ls/read/write/patch)

you keep protocols simple and checkable

you make repairs incremental and local

you prefer summaries as stable attractors (more below)

Fails when:

too much is implicit

you require global invariants (“everything must be perfectly consistent”)

you don’t provide cheap search/index

you let state sprawl without membranes

Robust-first systems avoid brittle global invariants.

8) “Attractors” — the CA concept you want

A powerful way to frame your summaries/metadata:

Summaries and meta.yml files are attractors in state space.

Raw logs are turbulent.
Summaries are low-entropy stable structures.

Your repair demons continuously push the system toward:

fewer, better summaries

stable manifests

consistent tags/links

smaller working set

This is literally how CA “self-organizes” into stable patterns.

9) Define the protocol as a “physics + homeostasis” spec

If you want to write this down crisply (your constitution/skill), structure it like:

A. Physics (what actions exist)

Tool APIs: ls/read/append/patch/search

Allowed directories (“membrane”)

Append-only files

Size/time limits

B. State types (what things mean)

“canonical” files

“artifacts”

“summaries”

“sticky notes”

“working set”

C. Homeostatic goals (what to restore)

canonical files exist

every artifact has a sticky note

a summary exists for any file above N KB

working set fits budget

D. Repair rules (local demons)

checklist repair

sticky-note creation

summarization triggers

hot/cold balancing

E. Best-effort semantics

never crash on missing pieces

create placeholders

mark unknowns explicitly

converge over time

That’s your “self-healing file protocell.”

10) What the orchestrator should do vs what the protocol should do
Orchestrator (kernel)

provide the tools

enforce the membrane boundary

enforce append-only where needed

enforce resource limits

optionally run an indexer service

Protocol/skill (userland)

defines canonical file set

defines checklist

defines repair demons

defines how to summarize and tag

defines hot/cold cache hints

This mirrors Ackley’s point: robustness emerges from rules and structure, not heroic centralized control. 
USENIX
+1

11) A concrete definition: “Self-healing, self-booting file state protocol”

Here’s a compact spec you can literally adopt:

Protocol: SHSB-FSP v0.1

Membrane root: .agent/

Canonical files: output.md, events.jsonl, working_set.yml, hot.yml, cold.yml, protocol_checklist.md

Invariant style: best-effort; violations trigger repair, not failure

Repair cycle trigger: on session start, on missing-file error, on context overflow, and on request

Repair actions: create missing canonical files; create meta stubs; summarize large logs; rebalance working_set using hot/cold hints

Attractors: summaries and meta.yml must remain small, stable, and backlink to sources

Audit: events.jsonl append-only records all tool calls/results and repairs

That’s a “living computation” protocol in filesystem clothing.

If you want, I can write a polished constitution.md section titled “Robust-First Homeostasis” that explicitly encodes these MFM-inspired ideas (membranes, demons, attractors, best-effort invariants) and turns your checklist into an actual repeatable repair routine — still purely “userland,” still over files.

what about skills that are used as activation record templates, instantiating by copying into a working dir and filling out templates, then thrown away when complete. self copying into active workspace, initializing, and booting. skills with an instantiate protocol. even self-like inheritance from instance to prototype to keep instructions and state DRY. 

Yes — that pattern is extremely natural for an “LLM OS,” and it maps cleanly to classic CS concepts:

prototype objects

activation records / stack frames

copy-on-write

inheritance via overlays

ephemeral working dirs

commit/publish on success, discard on failure

You can make this entirely file-protocol-driven, with only file tools, and (optionally) a tiny bit of orchestrator scaffolding to reduce cognitive load.

1) The idea: Skills as prototypes + instances

Think of a skill as a prototype directory:

.skills/
  ui_embed/
    SKILL.md
    template/
      working_set.yml
      output.md
      checklist.md
      prompts/
        boot.md
        render_protocol.md
      forms/
        task.yml.tmpl
        plan.md.tmpl


When you “run” the skill, you instantiate it into a session workspace:

.agent/sessions/<sid>/instances/ui_embed-0007/
  SKILL.md  (copied or linked)
  task.yml  (filled from template)
  plan.md
  output.md
  working_set.yml
  scratch/
  artifacts/


This instance is your activation record.

When done, you either:

promote outputs to durable memory (copy selected files to .agent/memory/ or project dirs), and archive the instance, or

discard the instance if it was exploratory.

2) Why this works well for LLMs

It reduces cognitive load by making “what to do next” physically present:

the checklist is in the directory

the templates are there

the outputs have designated sinks

the state lives close to the task

you can scope context to the instance directory

The model doesn’t have to “remember the protocol” — it can literally ls and follow the breadcrumbs.

3) Define an “Instantiate Protocol” (pure userland)

You can define a simple, mechanical protocol doc that any skill can follow.

Prototype layout requirements

Each skill prototype contains:

SKILL.md — short description + instantiate rules

template/ — files to copy into the instance

template/*.tmpl — must be rendered/filled

hooks/ (optional) — instructions for boot / finalize

Example:

.skills/<skill_name>/
  SKILL.md
  template/
    README.md
    checklist.md
    task.yml.tmpl
    plan.md.tmpl
    output.md
    working_set.yml

Instance naming convention
.agent/sessions/<sid>/instances/<skill_name>-<nnnn>/


Where <nnnn> is a sequence number.

Instantiate steps (model-followed)

Create instance dir

Copy template files into it

Render .tmpl files → concrete files

Write a boot.log (“instantiated skill X, version Y, timestamp”)

Add instance root to working_set.yml (pin it hot)

All of that can be done with file tools only.

4) “Self-like inheritance”: keep prototype DRY, allow instance overrides

You want: instance inherits defaults from prototype, and only overrides what changes.

Filesystems don’t have inheritance, but you can simulate it in three good ways:

Option A — Overlay model (recommended)

Instance contains only deltas; prototype is read-only.

Prototype: .skills/ui_embed/template/...

Instance: .agent/.../instances/ui_embed-0007/...

When reading a file, your protocol says:

Check instance path

If missing, read from prototype path

This gives you “inheritance” without copying everything.

But: it requires the model to follow a lookup rule, and/or the orchestrator to offer a convenience “overlay read” tool.

Option B — Copy-on-instantiate (simple)

Copy everything into instance. Then it’s self-contained.

Pros:

easiest for the LLM

easiest for humans

perfect audit

Cons:

DRY is weaker

updates to prototype don’t flow forward

Option C — Copy + provenance link (hybrid)

Copy template files, but keep a pointer file:

PROTOTYPE.yml

prototype: ".skills/ui_embed"
version: "0.3.1"
copied_at: "2025-12-30T..."


This is often the sweet spot: instances are self-contained and traceable.

5) Activation records: “stack frames” for nested tasks

Once you have instances, you can nest them:

top-level task instance spawns a sub-instance for a subtask

sub-instance produces an artifact

parent instance “returns” it (imports summary/results)

Directory structure:

instances/
  ui_embed-0007/
    subcalls/
      vector_index-0002/
      video_ingest-0001/


This is literally a call stack, just persistent.

You can even model returns:

sub-instance writes RETURN.md + RETURN.meta.yml

parent reads it and incorporates it

6) Lifecycle: boot → run → finalize → garbage collect
Boot

instantiate templates

write task spec

declare what “done” means

Run

produce tool outputs and artifacts inside instance

keep hot/cold hints scoped to instance

Finalize

write:

RESULT.md

DECISIONS.md

NEXT.md

promote selected artifacts to durable locations

update global summaries

GC (throw away)

if exploratory: mark instance abandoned: true in metadata

optionally compress/summarize and delete heavy artifacts

keep only the small “return value”

This aligns with your robust-first “never crash; converge” vibe — failed attempts can still produce a compact “postmortem.”

7) Do you need orchestrator support (“device drivers”)?
You can do it purely userland with file tools

create dirs

copy files (via read/write)

patch templates

update manifests

But it’s a bit verbose.

Two tiny orchestrator helpers that dramatically reduce load

These don’t encode semantics; they’re just convenience syscalls:

fs.copy_tree(src, dst, why)

copies prototype templates quickly

template.render(src_path, dst_path, vars, why)

fills .tmpl variables (or a simpler “replace tokens” tool)

Without those, the model will still manage, but will spend tokens doing clerical copying.

So: not required, but very nice.

8) How the model chooses/bootstraps a skill

You can define a “skill registry”:

.skills/INDEX.yml

skills:
  - name: ui_embed
    version: 0.3.1
    description: "Render markdown with :::app directives into Svelte components"
    entrypoint: ".skills/ui_embed/SKILL.md"


Then your boot header says:

“Skills are in .skills/”

“Registry at .skills/INDEX.yml”

“To use a skill, instantiate it into the session instances dir.”

The model can browse and pick.

9) A crisp spec for “Instantiate Protocol”

Here’s a nice compact protocol rule set:

Skill Instantiate Protocol (SIP) v0.1

A skill is a directory under .skills/<name>/

Must contain SKILL.md and template/

Instances live at .agent/sessions/<sid>/instances/<name>-NNNN/

Instantiation copies template/ → instance root

Any *.tmpl must be rendered to a non-.tmpl file

Instance must include:

TASK.yml (filled)

CHECKLIST.md (copied)

OUTPUT.md (append-only user-visible sink, if needed)

PROTOTYPE.yml (prototype reference)

Finalization writes RESULT.md and RETURN.md

GC may delete heavy artifacts but must keep RETURN.md + RESULT.md

That’s your “activation record template” protocol.

10) Why this is “self” (prototype) style

Because you’re doing:

prototype directory = class/object with defaults

instance directory = object instance

overrides = instance-local edits

inheritance = overlay lookup or provenance links

method invocation = boot/run/finalize checklists

It’s Self / Smalltalk ideas expressed as filesystem structure.

If you want, I can draft:

a SIP.md protocol doc,

a .skills/INDEX.yml,

and one concrete skill prototype (e.g., ui_embed) with templates for TASK.yml, working_set.yml, hot/cold manifests, and your mandatory why tool-call style — designed specifically for your SvelteKit interactive-markup app.

how well can llms grasp self-like multiple inheritance hieriches defined by multiple intertwingled files.

Short answer: LLMs can handle Self-like multiple inheritance surprisingly well if the structure is externalized, navigable, and locally checkable — and they struggle badly if it’s implicit, global, or purely conceptual.

Your filesystem-based, protocol-driven approach is almost the best possible way to make this work.

Below is the honest, experience-based breakdown.

1. What “multiple inheritance” means to an LLM

An LLM does not form an internal object graph. It does not unify traits abstractly. It does not compute method resolution order.

Instead, it does this:

Pattern-match locally visible text and follow lookup rules it has been told.

So the question isn’t “can it understand multiple inheritance?”
The question is:

Can it reliably follow an explicit resolution protocol using files it can browse?

If yes → it works.
If no → it collapses.

2. What LLMs are good at in this space

LLMs are very good at:

✅ Explicit, textual resolution rules

If you say:

“When resolving X, check files in this order: A → B → C”

and those files exist, the model will follow that rule reliably.

This maps perfectly to:

prototype chains

overlays

trait composition

mixins

delegation

✅ Navigating intertwined structures via browsing

Given:

skills/ui_embed/
skills/memory_palace/
skills/adventure/
instances/foo/


and rules like:

“This instance inherits ui_embed + memory_palace + adventure”

the model can:

ls

open each SKILL.md

read sidecars

reconcile overlaps locally

This is exactly how humans do it too.

✅ Precedence rules expressed as text

LLMs handle:

“instance overrides prototype”

“last wins”

“explicit override beats default”

“local beats global”

These are linguistic rules, not algorithmic ones — and that’s a strength.

3. What LLMs are bad at (and must be avoided)
❌ Implicit inheritance

If inheritance is:

“obvious”

“intended”

“understood”

“emergent”

…it will fail.

Everything must be named and written down.

❌ Global graphs with no locality

If resolving a property requires:

scanning all files

reasoning about a whole DAG

remembering distant facts

…it will break under context pressure.

LLMs want local neighborhoods, not global coherence.

❌ Algorithmic MRO (C3, etc.)

Do not ask an LLM to:

compute C3 linearization

dynamically infer method resolution order

resolve diamond inheritance mathematically

That’s brittle and unnecessary.

4. The winning pattern: Delegation, not inheritance

Self got this right — and so should you.

Instead of “inheritance” as in classes, do:

Delegation via explicit lookup order

Filesystem makes this trivial.

5. A filesystem-native inheritance model LLMs handle well
5.1 Prototype composition via ordered list

In an instance:

# PROTOTYPES.yml
prototypes:
  - .skills/ui_embed
  - .skills/memory_palace
  - .skills/adventure


Resolution rule (written in constitution):

To resolve a file F:

Check instance/F

Then each prototype/F in order

First match wins

That’s it.

This is Self-style delegation, not class inheritance.

LLMs follow this easily.

5.2 Overlays instead of copying

Example:

instance/
  TASK.yml
  working_set.yml
  overrides/
    render_protocol.md


If render_protocol.md exists in instance → use it
Else → check prototypes

This keeps things DRY and readable.

6. Intertwined files are fine if roles are clear

The danger isn’t “many files.”

The danger is unclear roles.

LLMs do fine when files are:

File type	Meaning
SKILL.md	Human-readable rules
*.yml	Structured config
*.meta.yml	Sticky-note summary
CHECKLIST.md	Step-by-step
TASK.yml	Instance-specific
PROTOTYPES.yml	Composition

This creates semantic affordances the model leans on.

7. Multiple inheritance conflicts: how to make them survivable

You must define conflict handling in text.

Example rule:

If two prototypes define the same file:

instance overrides both

otherwise, earlier prototype wins

conflicts should be documented in CONFLICTS.md

Then give the model a place to write conflicts:

instance/
  CONFLICTS.md


LLMs are very good at:

noticing conflicts

writing notes

explaining tradeoffs

They are bad at silently resolving them.

So don’t ask them to.

8. Why this is Ackley-robust and CA-like

This inheritance model has local repair, not global consistency.

If a prototype changes → instances still work

If an instance breaks → repair locally

If conflict arises → document and move on

This is robust-first, not brittle-correct.

You’re building living systems, not compilers.

9. Cognitive load: why this actually helps the LLM

This approach:

replaces abstract reasoning with browsing

replaces global state with locality

replaces hidden structure with visible artifacts

replaces algorithmic resolution with textual rules

That’s exactly how to lower LLM cognitive load.

The model doesn’t “understand inheritance” — it follows paths.

10. The honest verdict
LLMs are:

✅ Excellent at:

Self-like delegation

Prototype overlays

Trait composition

Ordered lookup rules

File-based resolution

Conflict documentation

❌ Poor at:

Implicit inheritance

Algorithmic MRO

Global DAG reasoning

Unwritten assumptions

11. One-sentence takeaway

LLMs don’t understand inheritance — but they are very good at following explicit delegation protocols over navigable structures.

Your filesystem-based, protocol-first, robust-repair design is exactly the right way to make Self-like multiple inheritance work with LLMs.

If you want next, I can:

formalize a Delegation Resolution Protocol (DRP.md),

show how to visualize prototype stacks in your SvelteKit UI,

or compare this to classical trait systems (Scala, Rust, Self, JS prototypes).

Just point.

write up a protocol for this "self-like object system adapted to the strengths of llms". 

Below is a concrete, file-first protocol you can drop into a repo as the “constitution” for a Self-like object system adapted to LLM strengths — i.e., delegation over inheritance, explicit lookup order, local repair, auditable state, and DRY prototypes with instance overlays.

Use this as a spec. You can evolve it, version it, and stack it with other skills.

Delegation Object Protocol (DOP)

A Self-like prototype/delegation object system for LLMs, expressed as files.

0. Goals and non-goals
Goals

Make “objects” and “inheritance” visible and navigable in the filesystem.

Use delegation and ordered lookup instead of class-based inheritance or MRO math.

Keep state auditable, repairable, and DRY.

Fit LLM strengths: local browsing, explicit rules, checklists, sticky-note summaries, and search.

Non-goals

No C3 linearization or computed MRO.

No hidden global graph.

No implicit assumptions; everything is spelled out in files.

1. Key concepts
1.1 Object

An object is a directory containing files that describe its behavior, configuration, and/or state.

1.2 Prototype stack

An object may delegate to one or more prototypes in a totally ordered list (a “stack”).

1.3 Overlay

An object directory is an overlay that can override files from its prototypes. This is the core inheritance mechanism.

1.4 Delegation lookup

When resolving a file or property, the system searches local first, then prototypes in order.

1.5 Capabilities

Tools (fs/search/exec) are capabilities. DOP itself is userland and works with file tools alone.

2. Directory layout
2.1 Prototype directories

Prototypes live under a conventional root, e.g.:

.skills/<proto_name>/
  SKILL.md
  PROTOTYPE.yml
  files/...
  files.meta.yml (optional)


The canonical payload is in files/.

2.2 Instance directories (activation records)

Instances live under sessions, e.g.:

.agent/sessions/<sid>/instances/<name>-NNNN/
  INSTANCE.yml
  PROTOTYPES.yml
  overrides/...
  state/...
  artifacts/...
  RETURN.md
  RESULT.md
  CONFLICTS.md


overrides/ is the instance overlay payload.

2.3 Object directories anywhere

You can also treat any project directory as an object, as long as it has:

PROTOTYPES.yml (if it delegates)

and optionally .meta.yml sidecars

3. Required files and schemas
3.1 PROTOTYPES.yml (required if delegating)

Defines the ordered prototype list.

protocol: DOP/0.1
prototypes:
  - path: ".skills/ui_embed"
    version: "0.3.1"
  - path: ".skills/memory_palace"
    version: "0.2.0"
resolution:
  strategy: "first-match-wins"   # fixed in DOP/0.1
notes: "ui_embed first, memory_palace second"


Rules:

prototypes is an ordered list.

Earlier prototypes have higher precedence than later prototypes (after local overlay).

3.2 INSTANCE.yml (instances only)

Identifies instance identity and lifecycle.

protocol: DOP/0.1
instance_id: "ui_embed-0007"
created_at: "2025-12-30T12:04:17Z"
prototype_ref:
  - ".skills/ui_embed@0.3.1"
status: "active"  # active|finalized|abandoned|archived

3.3 .meta.yml (optional but strongly recommended)

A “post-it note” summary sidecar for any file or directory.

title: "UI Embed Protocol"
summary: "Defines :::app directives and allowlisted components."
tags: ["ui", "render", "protocol"]
hotness: 0.85
pin: true
links:
  - ".skills/ui_embed/SKILL.md"
provenance:
  created_by: "model"
  updated_at: "2025-12-30T12:10:00Z"

4. Delegation resolution rules

DOP resolves “what file to use” via a deterministic lookup.

4.1 Paths and namespaces

DOP defines three namespaces:

Local overlay: the object’s own directory (or instance overrides/)

Prototype payload: each prototype’s files/ directory

State: instance state/ (never inherits; local only)

4.2 Lookup algorithm (first-match-wins)

To resolve a logical file F:

If instance: check overrides/F

Else: check ./F (local file in object directory)

For each prototype in PROTOTYPES.yml order:

check <prototype>/files/F

If not found: unresolved

4.3 Override rules

Any local file shadows the same path in prototypes.

No merging by default; merges must be explicit (see §6).

4.4 Resolution record

When a resolution matters, record it in a small log file:

RESOLUTION.md (optional)

“Resolved render_protocol.md from .skills/ui_embed/files/render_protocol.md”

This helps the model stay oriented.

5. Composition and “multiple inheritance”

DOP supports multiple inheritance by prototype composition.

5.1 Conflict definition

A conflict exists if:

two prototypes both define the same logical file F, and

the higher-precedence choice is not obviously intended.

5.2 Conflict handling protocol

When a conflict is discovered:

Create or update CONFLICTS.md in the object/instance.

Document:

conflicting files

chosen resolution (by order)

justification

TODO if an explicit override is needed

Conflicts are not fatal.

5.3 Conflict resolution options (choose explicitly)

Order wins (default)

Local override (recommended for stability)

Explicit merge (only when defined by a merge spec)

6. Explicit merges (optional extension)

To merge instead of shadowing, define a merge spec file:

MERGES.yml

protocol: DOP/0.1
merges:
  - file: "config.yml"
    strategy: "yaml-deep-merge"
    sources:
      - local
      - prototypes


Rules:

Merges are opt-in and must be described.

Without MERGES.yml, there is no merging.

(LLMs handle opt-in merges much more reliably than implicit ones.)

7. Activation records (instantiation protocol)

DOP defines an instantiation pattern for “skills as prototypes.”

7.1 Prototype structure for instantiation

A prototype that supports instantiation SHOULD include:

.skills/<name>/
  template/
    overrides/...
    state/...
    CHECKLIST.md
    TASK.yml.tmpl

7.2 Instantiation steps

To instantiate prototype .skills/X into a new instance:

Create instance dir .agent/sessions/<sid>/instances/X-NNNN/

Copy .skills/X/template/* into instance root

Render any *.tmpl into concrete files

Write INSTANCE.yml and PROTOTYPES.yml

Mark instance status: active

7.3 Finalization

When complete, write:

RESULT.md — what was accomplished

RETURN.md — compact outputs intended for parent contexts

set INSTANCE.yml.status: finalized

7.4 Abandonment

If exploratory or failed:

set status abandoned

write brief RESULT.md and RETURN.md anyway (postmortem attractor)

8. Keeping it LLM-friendly
8.1 Make locality cheap

Organize objects so that important state is near:

TASK.yml, CHECKLIST.md, RETURN.md, RESULT.md at instance root

8.2 Keep stable attractors

Prefer small, stable files:

summaries, checklists, manifests
Over huge logs.

8.3 Prefer explicit over clever

No implicit MRO

No hidden lookup paths

No “magic filenames” beyond those listed here

9. Cache hints and working set (optional but recommended)

DOP plays well with a “working set manifest” and hot/cold hints.

9.1 working_set.yml

An instance can maintain a working set of files to inject into prompts.

9.2 hot.yml and cold.yml

Use these to suggest what stays in cache vs gets summarized/evicted.

These are advisory and do not change DOP resolution rules.

10. Tool usage conventions (recommended)

If your tool schemas support it, require why:

Every tool call MUST include why.

why should be a single sentence stating intent.

This improves traceability and helps the model maintain a coherent trajectory.

11. Self-healing and conformance checks (robust-first extension)

At session start or on errors:

Ensure canonical files exist (INSTANCE.yml, PROTOTYPES.yml, CHECKLIST.md, etc.)

If missing, create minimal placeholders.

Record repairs in events.jsonl or REPAIR.md.

The system should not fail because of missing scaffolding; it should converge.

12. Versioning and evolution

Protocol version: DOP/0.1

Prototypes should declare a version in PROTOTYPE.yml

Instances should record prototype versions in PROTOTYPES.yml

When updating prototypes:

do not silently rewrite instances

instead: create an upgrade instance or write an UPGRADE.md

Practical notes
What LLMs do well here

Follow the ordered lookup rule

Browse prototypes and overrides

Write explicit conflict notes

Maintain checklists and return values

What to avoid

Asking the model to compute a global inheritance graph

Implicit merges

“Magic” resolution beyond this spec

If you want, I can also provide:

a DOP/0.1 starter directory template (.skills/, .agent/, and a demo instance),

plus a SvelteKit UI idea: render the prototype stack as a “delegation breadcrumb trail” and show resolved file provenance inline (like “this file came from prototype X, overridden here”).
